# GitLab

**GitLab** is is an open source end-to-end software development platform with built-in version control, issue tracking, code review, CI/CD, and more.

## Table of contents

- [GitLab](#gitlab)
  - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [CI/CD](#cicd)
    - [`.gitlab-ci.yml` file](#gitlab-ciyml-file)
    - [Runners](#runners)
    - [Jobs](#jobs)
    - [Pipelines](#pipelines)
    - [Stages](#stages)
    - [Caches](#caches)
    - [Artifacts](#artifacts)
      - [Job artifacts](#job-artifacts)
      - [Pipeline artifacts](#pipeline-artifacts)

## CI/CD

To use GitLab CI/CD:

- Ensure you have *runners* available to run your *jobs*.
- Create a `.gitlab-ci.yml` file at the root of your repository. This file is where you define your CI/CD jobs.

### `.gitlab-ci.yml` file

A **`.gitlab-ci.yml`** is a file that contains the CI/CD configuration.

### Runners

A **runner** is an agent that runs your CI/CD jobs.

### Jobs

A **job** is an instructions that a runner has to execute.

When you commit the file to your repository, the runner runs your jobs. The job results are displayed in a *pipeline*.

### Pipelines

A **pipeline** is a collection of jobs split into different *stages*.

[↑ Pipelines](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/pipelines/)

### Stages

A **stage** is a keyword that defines certain stage of a job, such as `build` and `deploy`. Jobs of the same stage are executed in parallel.

Multiple jobs in the same stage are executed in parallel, if there are enough concurrent runners.

If *all* jobs in a stage succeed, the pipeline moves on to the next stage.

If *any* job in a stage fails, the next stage is not (usually) executed and the pipeline ends early.

### Caches

A **cache** is one or more files a job downloads and saves. Subsequent jobs that use the same cache don’t have to download the files again, so they execute more quickly.

Use cache for dependencies, like packages you download from the internet. Cache is stored where GitLab Runner is installed, and uploaded to S3 if distributed cache is enabled.

Both caches and *artifacts* define their paths relative to the project directory, and can’t link to files outside it.


[↑ Caching](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/caching)

### Artifacts

An **artifact** is a file created as part of a build process that often contain metadata about that build's jobs like test results, security scans, etc.

Use artifacts to pass intermediate build results between stages. Artifacts are generated by a job, stored in GitLab, and can be downloaded.


#### Job artifacts

Jobs can output an archive of files and directories. This output is known as a job artifact.

#### Pipeline artifacts

A **pipeline artifact** is a file created by GitLab after a pipeline finishes. Pipeline artifacts are different to *job artifacts* because they are not explicitly managed by .gitlab-ci.yml definitions.

Pipeline artifacts are used by the test coverage visualization feature to collect coverage information.

Pipeline artifacts from the latest pipeline are kept forever. Artifacts from pipelines superseded by a newer pipeline are deleted seven days after their creation date. It can take up to two days for GitLab to delete pipeline artifacts from when they are due to be deleted.
