# Amazon S3, MinIO

## Table of contents

- [Amazon S3, MinIO](#amazon-s3-minio)
  - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Amazon S3](#amazon-s3)
    - [File size limits](#file-size-limits)
    - [Multipart upload](#multipart-upload)
    - [Downloading an object](#downloading-an-object)
  - [MinIO](#minio)
    - [Buckets](#buckets)
    - [Users](#users)
    - [Policies](#policies)
    - [`compose.yml` file](#composeyml-file)

## Amazon S3

[↑ Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3) or **Amazon Simple Storage Service** is a service offered by Amazon Web Services, AWS, that provides object storage through a web service interface.

The basic storage units of Amazon S3 are *objects* which are organized into *buckets*. Each object is identified by a unique, user-assigned key. Buckets can be managed using the console provided by Amazon S3, programmatically with the AWS SDK, or the [↑ REST API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/Welcome.html).

Requests are authorized using an [↑ access control list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Access-control_list) associated with each object bucket and support versioning which is disabled by default. Since buckets are typically the size of an entire file system mount in other systems, this access control scheme is very coarse-grained. In other words, unique access controls cannot be associated with individual files.

### File size limits

An object in S3 can be between 0 bytes and 50 TB. If an object is larger than 50 TB, it must be divided into chunks prior to [↑ uploading](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/upload-objects.html).

### Multipart upload

Multipart upload allows you to upload a single object as a set of parts. Each part is a contiguous portion of the object's data. You can upload these object parts independently and in any order. If transmission of any part fails, you can retransmit that part without affecting other parts. After all parts of your object are uploaded, Amazon S3 assembles these parts and creates the object. In general, when your object size reaches 100 MB, you should consider using multipart uploads instead of uploading the object in a single operation.

Using multipart upload provides the following advantages:

- **Improved throughput** – You can upload parts in parallel to improve throughput.
- **Quick recovery from any network issues** – Smaller part size minimizes the impact of restarting a failed upload due to a network error.
- **Pause and resume object uploads** – You can upload object parts over time. After you initiate a multipart upload, there is no expiry; you must explicitly complete or stop the multipart upload.
- **Begin an upload before you know the final object size** – You can upload an object as you are creating it.

We recommend that you use multipart upload in the following ways:

- If you're uploading large objects over a stable high-bandwidth network, use multipart upload to maximize the use of your available bandwidth by uploading object parts in parallel for multi-threaded performance.
- If you're uploading over a spotty network, use multipart upload to increase resiliency to network errors by avoiding upload restarts. When using multipart upload, you need to retry uploading only the parts that are interrupted during the upload. You don't need to restart uploading your object from the beginning.

[↑ Multipart upload process](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/mpuoverview.html#mpu-process).

### Downloading an object

[↑ `GetObject`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html).

## MinIO

[↑ MinIO](https://min.io) is an object storage solution that provides an Amazon Web Services S3-compatible API and supports all core S3 features.

MinIO is built to deploy anywhere — public or private cloud, bare metal infrastructure, orchestrated environments, and edge infrastructure.

MinIO's [↑ documentation](https://min.io/docs/minio).

### Buckets

MinIO uses buckets to organize objects. A bucket is similar to a folder or directory in a filesystem, where each bucket can hold an arbitrary number of objects.

**Versioning** allows to keep multiple versions of the same object under the same key.

**Object Locking** prevents objects from being deleted. Required to support retention and legal hold. Can only be enabled at bucket creation.

**Quota** limits the amount of data in the bucket.

**Retention** imposes rules to prevent object deletion for a period of time. Versioning must be enabled in order to set bucket retention policies.

### Users

A MinIO user consists of a unique access key, username, and corresponding secret key, password. Clients must authenticate their identity by specifying both a valid access key, username, and the corresponding secret key, password, of an existing MinIO user.
Groups provide a simplified method for managing shared permissions among users with common access patterns and workloads.

Users inherit access permissions to data and resources through the groups they belong to.
MinIO uses Policy-Based Access Control, PBAC, to define the authorized actions and resources to which an authenticated user has access. Each policy describes one or more actions and conditions that outline the permissions of a user or group of users.

Each user can access only those resources and operations which are explicitly granted by the built-in role. MinIO denies access to any other resource or action by default.

### Policies

MinIO uses Policy-Based Access Control, PBAC, to define the authorized actions and resources to which an authenticated user has access. Each policy describes one or more actions and conditions that outline the permissions of a user or group of users.

MinIO PBAC is built for compatibility with AWS IAM policy syntax, structure, and behavior.

Each user can access only those resources and operations which are explicitly granted by the built-in role. MinIO denies access to any other resource or action by default.

### `compose.yml` file

```yaml
services:
  s3:
    image: minio/minio:RELEASE.2024-03-15T01-07-19Z
    container_name: minio
    environment:
      MINIO_ROOT_USER: admin
      MINIO_ROOT_PASSWORD: password
    ports:
      - "4420:9000"
      - "4430:9001"
    volumes:
      - ./volumes/minio:/data
    command: server --console-address ":9001" /data
```
